VARIABLES AND VALUES

	VARIABLES AND ASSIGNMENTS

You were taught in basic algebra that a variable represents a number. The same applies in Python, 
except that a variable can also represent other values besides numbers, which can be integer
or float (we will look at this briefly), we took a variable "name" and assign it a value "ubon".
We take another variable "x" and assign it a value "10".

Variable assignment

x = 10
print(x)

The statement "x = 10" is what is called an assignment statement. Assignment is associating a 
value to a variable. In Python, the key to assigning statement is the use of an ASSIGNMENT OPERATOR
which is the symbol "=", as you know from maths, the equal sign.

To put it in another way, the statement "x = 10" binds a variable we named "x" to the value "10".
In this case, "x" is a type "INT" because it is bound to a value of interger type.

You can assign and reassign a variable as often as you wish. The variable type will change when you 
reassign it an expression of a different type.

The print statement displays the assigned value of variable "x". Reassigning the variable a different
value to the variable will evident after printing it.

Multiple Variable Assignment

x = 10
print(x)
x = 'apple'
print(x)

When you run this script/program, here is what you should see:

10
apple

Assigning Multiple Variables Same Value

You can assign a single value to several variable simultenously in Python.
Consider this example:

x = y = z = 10
print(x)
print(y)
print(z)

When you run the script above, you will notice that the value of variables x, y, and z are all 10.
This is because an interger object with the value 10 is created and all the variables are assigned 
to its memory location.

You can also assign multiple variables multiple values in one line of code.
This is best illustrated in the example below.

Assigning Multiple Variable Different Values

name, age, occupation = 'ubon\n', 10, '\npython programmer'
print(name + age + occupation)

Three object "ubon", 10, "python programmer" are assigned to variables name, age, occupation respectively.

